Generative artificial intelligence (also generative AI or GenAI) is artificial intelligence capable of generating text, images, or other media, using generative models. Generative AI models learn the patterns and structure of their input training data and then generate new data that has similar characteristics.
In the early 2020s, advances in transformer-based deep neural networks enabled a number of generative AI systems notable for accepting natural language prompts as input. These include large language model chatbots such as ChatGPT, Copilot, Bard, and LLaMA, and text-to-image artificial intelligence art systems such as Stable Diffusion, Midjourney, and DALL-E.
Generative AI has uses across a wide range of industries, including art, writing, script writing, software development, product design, healthcare, finance, gaming, marketing, and fashion. Investment in generative AI surged during the early 2020s, with large companies such as Microsoft, Google, and Baidu as well as numerous smaller firms developing generative AI models. However, there are also concerns about the potential misuse of generative AI, including cybercrime or creating fake news or deepfakes which can be used to deceive or manipulate people
Generative AI models are used to power chatbot products such as ChatGPT, programming tools such as GitHub Copilot, text-to-image products such as Midjourney, and text-to-video products such as Runway Gen-2.
Generative AI features have been integrated into a variety of existing commercially-available products such as Microsoft Office, Google Photos, and Adobe Photoshop. Many generative AI models are also available as open-source software, including Stable Diffusion and the LLaMA language model.
Smaller generative AI models with up to a few billion parameters can run on smartphones, embedded devices, and personal computers. For example, LLaMA-7B (a version with 7 billion parameters) can run on a Raspberry Pi 4 and one version of Stable Diffusion can run on an iPhone 11.

Larger models with tens of billions of parameters can run on laptop or desktop computers. To achieve an acceptable speed, models of this size may require accelerators such as the GPU chips produced by Nvidia and AMD or the Neural Engine included in Apple silicon products. For example, the 65 billion parameter version of LLaMA can be configured to run on a desktop PC.
Language models with hundreds of billions of parameters, such as GPT-4 or PaLM, typically run on datacenter computers equipped with arrays of GPUs (such as Nvidia's H100) or AI accelerator chips (such as Google's TPU). These very large models are typically accessed as cloud services over the Internet.
In 2022, the United States New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductors to China imposed restrictions on exports to China of GPU and AI accelerator chips used for generative AI. Chips such as the Nvidia A800[60] and the Biren Technology BR104 were developed to meet the requirements of the sanctions.
There is free software on the market capable of recognizing text generated by generative artificial intelligence (such as GPTZero), as well as images, audio or video coming from it.